What is Terraform?

Terraform is an open-source Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool developed by HashiCorp. It allows you to define and provision infrastructure using a high-level configuration language known as HCL (HashiCorp Configuration Language).

Instead of manually creating cloud resources (servers, databases, networking, etc.), Terraform allows you to write code to automate these tasks across multiple cloud providers.


Key Features:
IaC (Infrastructure as Code): Manage infrastructure using version-controlled code.

Multi-cloud: Supports AWS, Azure, GCP, Kubernetes, etc.

Declarative Language: Describe what infrastructure you want, not how to create it.

Execution Plan: Terraform shows what it will change before making changes.

State Management: Tracks resource state for consistency and updates.

Modular and Reusable: Break infrastructure into modules.

Terraform vs Other IaC Tools:
Feature	Terraform	CloudFormation	Ansible
Language	HCL	JSON/YAML	YAML + Python
Focus	Provisioning	AWS provisioning	Configuration
Multi-cloud	✅ Yes	❌ AWS only	✅ Yes
Agentless	✅ Yes	✅ Yes	✅ Yes
Mutable/Immutable	Immutable	Mutable	Mutable

🏗️ 2. Terraform Architecture
Terraform operates using a well-defined workflow and architecture composed of the following core components:

2.1 Providers
Responsible for interacting with cloud platforms or services.

Each provider (e.g., AWS, GCP, Azure, Kubernetes) has its own plugin.

Defined in .tf files like:

hcl
Copy
Edit
provider "aws" {
  region = "us-west-2"
}
2.2 Resources
The most important building block in Terraform.

Represents a specific infrastructure object (e.g., EC2 instance, S3 bucket, etc.)

Example:

h
Copy
Edit
resource "aws_instance" "my_ec2" {
  ami           = "ami-0c55b159cbfafe1f0"
  instance_type = "t2.micro"
}
2.3 Modules
A way to organize and reuse Terraform code.

Group resources and logic together into reusable components.

Can be local or remote (e.g., from Terraform Registry).

2.4 State File
Terraform saves the current state of the infrastructure in a file named terraform.tfstate.

This file is critical for:

Tracking resource metadata

Planning future changes

Supports remote backends (e.g., S3, Terraform Cloud) for team collaboration.

2.5 Execution Plan
terraform plan shows what Terraform intends to do.

Prevents unexpected changes by allowing you to review actions before applying them.

2.6 Terraform Workflow
Write: Write configuration in .tf files

Initialize: terraform init downloads plugins

Plan: terraform plan shows what will change

Apply: terraform apply makes the changes

Destroy (optional): terraform destroy tears it all down

